---
layout: post
title: Freedom
date: 2023-06-08 10:14:00-0400
description: how will you measure your freedom?
categories: life
giscus_comments: true
related_posts: true
---

One of my favorite poems is <a href="https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/157986/high-flight-627d3cfb1e9b7">John Gillespie Magee Jr.’s “High Flight”</a>, which he wrote while he was still in training to join the Royal Canadian Air Force in 1940. He mailed it to his parents just a few months before he died in a training accident. The poem speaks to not only the transcendence of flight and freedom, but also to the quiet, mournful joy that despite his tragic death, he achieved a fullness in life.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/freedom_blog.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Figure: The ethereal feeling of freedom incarnated in my mind's eye
</div>

I have often thought about what this kind of freedom looks like for me. What does it look like to “touch the face of God”, and join the “long, delirious, burning blue”? Before, I thought that work would set me free. I’ve had this moral weight since I was a kid that I wanted to do something good for the world. Something generative. Giving. Sacrificial. The act of changing a part of the world would give me the high of seeing people’s lives lifted and lightened. Steve Jobs was a big influencer here. The gilded promise of “finding my calling” and discovering the next drug, the next computing platform, the next equation that would save the world from poverty and sin. But after going to college and seeing that this race was long and arduous to achieve the kind of change I had envisioned, the moral weight became a burden. Work did not set me free — it held me captive, tempting me with a dream while showing me my poor ability to crawl toward it.

Towards the end of college, though, my girlfriend of multiple years broke up with me. It was tempestuous, arduous, and untimely work to pick up the pieces of where I felt left off. That began this next phase in my life. I see this phase of my life as one of excavation and inner work. 

I began the process of not only imbibing information from textbooks, slides, and instruction, but also the inner work of developing processes that allowed me to listen closer to who I was and who I wanted to be. I found God, while relinquishing my grip on fear, handing it to something greater than myself. I allowed myself to prioritize friendships more, relishing the joy that comes only from late night movies and drinks, early mornings shenanigans, and mid-day hikes. I excavated more of who I was — my joy no longer stemmed from just doing integrals in Mathematica and training models — it came from the artistic side of me, too. I unearthed the poetry of well-formed sentences, the way that words could reflect the fullness and humanness of the author. My head became a monastery of consciousness, where ideas came to frolic and play. The shackles of what I valued — prestige for the sake of chasing prestige, with the eventual goal of trading it for impact — have loosened. 

These days, I’m approaching an inflection point in the journey of discovering who I want to be. I always admired people who have a strong conviction when they speak — they sound like they’ve lived many lives. But as I’ve gotten to know people, I realize that we all see the world dimly. We’re all forgetful, creatures of habit trying to find the light switch. This most recent realization has given me freedom to realize that I can be who I want to be. Despite others’ judgements, I don’t need to be defined by a single label. I can simultaneously be a software engineer, Asian American, a thinker that writes, a runner, a loyal son, an environmentalist, etc. — and that when people tell me what I _should do_ out of duty or a desire to “look out for me”, I have the agency to gracefully say no. 

These days, I’m continuing to explore the amorphous bounds of who I am — the alloy of my childhood desires, the preparation of God, and the genetics that build my brain and bones. I can feel myself getting close, ejecting exhausted fuel containers as I cross the atmosphere. I can see it in the way that I wake up early wanting to start my day, another day letting my mind wander “where never lark nor eagle flew”.  I can see it in the quiet moments laying in the grass, letting my mind expand as I walk my hands on the cotton sky. I can see it in the way that I view the world as a beautiful mess that has space for you and me.