---
layout: post
title: Embarrassment and Humanness
date: 2023-05-14 10:14:00-0400
description: when is embarrassment worth the risk?
categories: life
giscus_comments: true
related_posts: true
---

I’ve recently been on a crusade to rid myself of the fear of losing face. I have a hypothesis that as children, we are more fearless than we are as adults, and that a touch of childlike ignorance gives us hope that we can do _anything_ and be _anything_. If we carried more of that hopefulness, we would be more powerful as adults. We instead become burdened by a hazy rulebook for what’s socially acceptable and what’s not. Each rule is accompanied by a lattice of corrective experiences — to name a few, the experiences of poverty, racism and its effects on our impressionable minds, and the passing of generational trauma. Where excitement and curiosity were before, fear and embarrassment grab on. 

As an example from _Minor Feelings_, by Cathy Park Hong:

> Children are cruel. They will parrot whatever racist shit their parents tell them in private in the bluntest way imaginable. Racism is “out in the open” among kids in the same way that “racism is out in the open“ in the Trump administration.
> 

And for all the ways we try to protect our kids from the sin of the world, sin inevitably creeps through. The prelapsarian fall brings shame and fear, boxes that prompt us to regress to states of invisibility. 

I see embarrassment as the taut string that withdraws romantic emotion to reason, generative ideas to rote memorization, musical divinity to sheet music. Holding myself tight feels comfortable, and it’s easy for me to use the vocabulary of self-criticism when I let my personality freely romp and ripple. 

A few days ago, one of my closest friends from college talked about how he had explored and found some non-profits to work with while he worked a consistent day job. I salivated at the novelty of being able to hold multiple jobs — one that was a technical training ground and another that nourished a sense of purpose. I bounced with child-like excitement, hoping to work for a non-profit organization in climate change advocacy. 

Two days later, I walked into a lobby in Union Square that housed the Environmental Defense Fund nonprofit. I’ve long lived by this idea of the “minute of bravery” — where I let my vocal chords, my legs, my arms, take control over my body to overcome a great fear of embarrassment. And just as times before, I told myself that for whatever embarrassment I faced, it would a) not be that bad b) the outcome was worthwhile. As I walked through the lobby, I approached the security guard with a light smile. I hid my fear under a new button shirt from Uniqlo and a well-groomed exterior. I told the security guard that I didn’t have an appointment, but that I wanted to see the EDF. I didn’t have a game plan — I had a resume and an elevator pitch, and a grudging resolve to bear whatever embarrassment came once I stepped into the offices.  He waved me to the elevator and told me to get off at the 17th floor. 

When I stepped off the elevator, the receptionist saw me across the room and across the welcome desk. My eyes looked to the ground and my legs walked me forward. I approached her with a jitter in my body — I told her I was asking for a pro-bono position, and she looked at me with an empty gaze. There was plainly nothing she could do for me, a random stranger that had just walked in. Losing my bearings, I told her I was working in tech, that I’d written lots and _lots_ of code, that I took many classes in renewable energy and climate change policy. I spewed and eventually sputtered, but she told me that all she could do was direct me to call a number. “212-5…” — the numbers joined the air that held my deflated hopes. When I came out of the elevator in the ground floor, the security guard called me as I was about to leave. His expression was now cold: “You told me you had an appointment.” I said plainly, “I told you I _didn’t_ have an appointment.” He stared for 5 seconds. Before he had a chance, I turned around to the door and wished him a good day, to which I received no response. The receptionist upstairs had called the guard. 

I left the building with beads of sweat seeping through the fibers of my mask. From the pedestrians, to the cars rushing by, to the buildings towering overhead, New York was staring at me. My phone screen provided me an excuse to pretend like I was unaware of my shame slanting into their haughty laughter. Why does embarrassment feel even worse than I’d remembered? Why didn’t I think this through before going in? Why was I so good at beating myself up? I have a few friends that have no shame at all, not to my knowledge. How do they know when to listen to their shame? Do they listen to their shame? Why is my voice so loud right now? Am I always so easily embarrassed? Regardless of where I went, I had no escape — I could only cut through this shame by turning inward, finding the source, facing myself. 

Afterwards, I did a small exercise afterwards that made me think about the source of my embarrassment. In my younger days, I was a pianist. I would often walk on stage with hands covered in sweat-absorbing baby powder. Part of me wondered if I had practiced the bridge run well enough, fast enough. I wonder, if instead of normal recitals, my piano teacher had had recitals where she asked everybody to play the same exact piece, in exactly the most braindead way, at a baseline tempo that was comfortable for any virgin piano player that hadn’t fornicated with Hanon’s etudes, if I would have almost no fear. Such a performance would parlay the risks of ruining the radiant finger run, the second repeat, and the delicate lullabies for the security of not embarrassing ourselves in front of others. But that choice would also make music boring, if not actively damaging. As a musician, it was my job to forget the embarrassment of the moment, and focus on what a joy it was to be able to indulge my fingers, connected to my brain, connected to my soul. That which was generative exposed opportunities for embarrassment, but also reflected all the hours of practice, of listening, of absorbing the sweetness that came with playing for myself and then for others. 

It’s that space where embarrassment currently occupies — the liminal boundary between rote instructions and passion — that I think that we have the opportunity to bring humanness into our lives. Being embarrassed about something means that there’s something worth exploring and caring about. It’s what makes us uniquely, unique. And it gives us something to share when others go through similar pains and joys in their lives — when called, we will be prepared to tactfully share our human failures, human ambitions, human desires, and human shortcomings.

Embarrassment, and my desire to overcome it, is part of the reason that I’m starting this blog. When I fear embarrassment, I roll up and imprison myself to my shadow. Comfort is an amulet against shame. I’ve been actively convincing myself, though, that if I allow myself to be unzipped, there’s comfort on the other side. It’s not the same comfort as blending in, so as to avoid any scrutiny. It’s a comfort that I’m accepted by my close friends that know my deepest parts, and that I’m enough. Any other validation is secondary. Though I’m naked when I alchemize my art and ambition, I hope to look back and say that I lived with more boldness than fear, and that people knew me for who I was.